Hello friends
In this video let us discuss about the implementation of
insertion sort
So this function insertion sort will take the array to
be sorted and its size as parameters and the array
passed will be sorted by this function
Suppose we're passing this array of size five
We have elements 40 10 50 30 and 20 first
we declared integer variables I value and index
Now let us use a for loop for i equal to
one i less than size
I plus plus in every iteration
We copy the current element and the index to
variables value and index and compared the current element with
its previous elements
And if these elements are not in the right order
it is swapped this we sort the till that particular
index Let us see how so In the first iteration
I equal to one so arr of one which is
10 is copy to value and the index one
is stored in index now compare ten with its previous
elements
So the while condition index greater than zero is true
here and arr of index minus one greater than value
is also true
since 40 is greater than 10 so first Element 40
is greater than 10
That is it is not in the right order so
we need to make changes
So copy arr of index minus one to arr of
index and now decrement the index
So index equal to zero Now
Now Check the while condition index greater than zero is
not satisfied
So control comes out of while loop and set arr
of index equal to value and first iteration of for
loop is now completed
Now in the second iteration i is equal to two so
arr of two which is 50 is copied to
value and the index two is copied to index
now compare 50 with its previous elements
So the while condition index greater than zero is true
and the next condition arr of index minus one greater
than value is failed since 40 is not greater than
So the conditions failed
It means from this index
All previous elements are already in sorted order
So control comes out of the while Loop and set
arr of index equal to value and the second iteration
of for Loop is also completed
Now Now in the third iteration i is equal to three
So arr of three which is 30 is copied to
value and the index three is stored
index now compared 30 with its previous elements
So the while condition index greater than zero is true
since index equal to three and the next condition arr
of index minus one greater than value is also true
since 50 is greater than 30
So it is not in the right order so we
need to make changes
So copy arr of index minus one to arr of
index and now decrement the index
So index becomes two now
Now check the while condition index greater than zero is
satisfied and the next condition arr of index minus one
greater than value is also true since 40 is greater than
30 So again we need to bring 30 to the
1st and 40 after that So copy 40 to arr of
index now Decrement the index so index becomes one now
now check the while condition index greater than zero is
satisfied and the next condition arr of index minus one
greater than value fails since 10 is not greater than
30 so control comes out of the while loop now
place value at arr of Index and this iteration of
for Loop is also completed now in the next iteration i
is equal to four
So arr of which his 20 is copied to
value and the index four is stored in index now
compared 20 with its previous elements
So the while condition index greater than zero is true
and arr of index minus one greater than value is
also true since 50 is greater than 20 so it
is not in the right order so we need to
make changes
So copy arr of index minus one to arr of
index and now decrement index and index becomes three now so
the while condition index greater than zero is now true
An arr of index minus one greater and value is
also satisfied since 40 is greater than 20 so copy
40 to arr of index and now decrement index and index
becomes two now
Now the while condition index greater than zero is true
An arr of index minus one greater than value is
also true since 30 is greater than 20 so copy
30 to arr of index and now decrement index
So that index becomes one
Now Now the while condition index greater than zero is
true and arr of index minus one Greater than value
fails since 10 is not greater than 20
So the control comes out of the while loop now
place the value 20 at arr of Index which is
it's right position
And this iteration of for Loop is also completed
Now in the next iteration i is equal to five which
is not less than size
So the for loop condition fails and control comes out of
for Loop
And as you can see the arr is sort out
now
so this is how we can implement insertion sort.